 Ground truth version of Visibility Bitmask Ambient Occlusion (VBAO | https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11376).
    This version matches the result of a brute force ray marcher that shares the same limitations and assumptions
    (limited number of screen space depth samples, depth sample distribution along marching direction, thickness assumption).
    GT-VBAO supports both, uniform hemisphere weighting, and cosine weighted hemisphere weighting.
    
    This work was partially fundend by 1000Orks: https://1000orks.com/ | https://x.com/1000orks.
    
    An overview of the original VBAO including source code can be found on Olivier Therrien's blog: https://cdrinmatane.github.io/posts/ssaovb-code/.
    
--- EDIT: A version of GT-VBAO that doesn't require bidirectional ray marching can be found here: https://www.shadertoy.com/view/Xc3yzs
    
    GT-VBAO accounts for the shortcoming of the original VBAO implementation in the following ways:
    
    1. correct slice-local sample distribution: 
        VBAO assumes a uniform distribution of samples in each slice. 
        However, this does not account for the pole at the view vector, which leads to a lower sample density close to angN.
        In addition, for properly cosine weighted AO, the cosine falloff towards the horizons also needs to be considered here.
        
        To account for the non-uniform slice-local sample pdf the min/max-horizon angles are remapped by the corresponding CDF.
        
        Because of the bit mask approach we can't remap the sample locations themselves as it is usually done via the inverse CDF.
        However, we can apply the inverse mapping (i.e. the CDF itself) to the constant interval we intent to sample.
        This also has the advantage that we do not need to invert the CDF (at least as long as we are only interested in AO).
    
    2. treat the slice-local samples as point samples instead of as sectors (+ jitter the sample group as a whole)
        This is done by calculating the quantized arc length from the quantized min/max-horizon angles instead of 
        computing the arc length from the unquantized angles and then quantizing it.
        
        The code here uses an equivalent approach that first computes two bit masks from the min/max-angles, respectively, 
        and then 'ands' those together. The resulting code is a bit more readable and should produce the same number of instructions.
        
    3. account for perspective distorion when not using an orthographic projection
        VBAO treats a perspective camera the same way as an orthographic one. 
        A perspective projection can be accounted for by sampling the slice direction in a local frame around the view vector (view vec space).
        The resulting slice direction can then subsequently be projected to the image plane.
        
        Also, when accounting for the assumed thickness by computing an offseted position from the current depth sample we can not do so using the
        view vector. Instead we need to compute an offset direction for each depth sample associated position individually.
    
    These changes apply to both, the uniformly weighted hemisphere variant, as well as the cosine weighted hemisphere variant of GT-VBAO.
    However, the cosine weighted hemisphere variant also requires us to make changes to the slice direction sampling routine:
    
    4. support for slice direction sampling from a cosine weighted hemisphere via one of 3 options:
        1 - Sample uniformly, but account for the cosine distribution by weighting each slice accordingly.
            This is the most straightforward option, but it produces significant amounts of variance.
        2 - Sample a ray direction from the world space cosine lobe around N. Project this ray direction to the image plane and
            use it as the slice direction. I don't have a prove that this is actually correct, but comparing it to option 1 and to the
            reference ray marcher output it most likely is. While this approach (appears) to perfectly sample proportionally
            to the desired slice pdf, it has the drawback that it requires 2 random numbers to generate a single slice direction.
            This usually reduces the effectiveness of low-discrepancy sequences and sampling patterns that are designed to distribute 
            the sampling error in image space.
        3 - Directly importance sample the one dimensional pdf of slice angles using a single random number. 
            The difficulty with this approach is that the corresponding CDF is not invertible.
            It is, however, possible to construct a pretty good invertible approximation that does not produce any noticeable bias.
            
            The CDF we are trying to approximate is a simple sinusoid s-curve if the view vector is orthogonal to the surface normal.
            The more the view vector alignes with the surface normal the more the s-curve blends towards a simple linear ramp.
            However, at the same time as the linear blend happens the C1-continuous sinusoid s-curve morphes into a C2-continuous sinusoid s-curve.
            The C2-continuous sinusoid s-curve is one of those curves that appear simple at first glance but then turn out to be non-invertible.
            
            The approximation of the inverse CDF I came up with looks like this:
            
            float SampleSlice(float x, float sinNV)
            {
                float s = QBias(sinNV, 0.15);

                      x =    SinStep(x);
                float y = InvSinStep(x, s);
                      y = InvSinStep(y);

                return y;
            } 
            
            SinStep(x) is the C1-continuous sinusoid s-curve and InvSinStep(x) its inverse.
            InvSinStep(x, s) is a generalization that allows to morph the curve into a linear ramp by stretching it
            (simply lerping towards a linear ramp wouldn't give the desired behavior and also wouldn't be invertible).
            QBias(x, b) is a simple quatratic bias used to compute the streching value from the sine of the angle between
            the view vector and the surface normal. The bias of 0.15 is chosen so as to match the ground truth pdf.
            In practice, the first SinStep(x) and the last InvSinStep(y) can be optimized away by not working with angles directly
            (compare the two versions of SampleSliceDir(vvsN, rnd01) in Buffer C).
            
            The sampling option used here can be set via GTVBAO_SLICE_SAMPLING_MODE at the top of Buffer C (default: option 3)
    
    I also tried using a dedicated bit mask for both ray marching directions, separately, but found that, at least for this test scene here, 
    it made very little difference. 32 bits for the whole slice seems like a solid choice.
    
    
    buffera.txt: input logic
    bufferb.txt: g-buffer rendering
    bufferc.txt: GT-VBAO + reference ray marcher/caster
    doc.txt   : documentation + presentation