Percentage-Closer Soft Shadows
Randima Fernando
NVIDIA Corporation
1. Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in computer graphics is
generating accurate soft shadows from area light sources.
Soft shadows provide valuable cues about the relationships
between objects, becoming sharper as objects contact each
other and more blurry (softer) the further they are apart.

generate soft shadows exist, none produce results as
realistic as ours with the same features: ease of integration,
robustness, and interactivity. Common failings include
producing umbras that do not shrink as penumbras grow.

3. Percentage-Closer Soft Shadows
The PCSS technique builds on regular shadow mapping:
when shading each pixel in the eye view, PCSS returns a
floating‐point value that indicates the amount of shadowing
at each shaded point (replacing the traditional depth
comparison of ordinary shadow mapping).
PCSS is based on the observation that as the size of the PCF
kernel increases, the resulting shadows become softer. The
challenge is to vary the filter size intelligently to achieve the
correct degree of softness. To do this, the algorithm uses a
three‐step approach when shading each eye‐view pixel:

This sketch presents a new method, called Percentage‐
Closer Soft Shadows (PCSS), for generating perceptually
accurate soft shadows. Based on shadow mapping
[Williams 1978] and percentage‐closer filtering (PCF)
[Reeves et al. 1987], PCSS has these key characteristics:
• Generates perceptually accurate soft shadows
post‐processing,

Step 2: Penumbra estimation. Using a parallel planes
approximation, we estimate the penumbra width based on
the light size and blocker/receiver distances from the light:
wPenumbra = (dReceiver – dBlocker) ⋅ wLight / dBlocker

• Uses a single light source sample (one shadow map)
• Requires no pre‐processing,
additional geometry

Step 1: Blocker search. We search the shadow map and
average the depths that are closer to the light source than to
the point being shaded (the “receiver”). The size of the
search region depends on the light size and the receiver’s
distance from the light source.

or

• Seamlessly replaces a traditional shadow map query
(embodies the same advantages as traditional shadow
mapping—independent of scene complexity, works
with alpha testing, displacement mapping, and so on)
• Runs in real‐time on current consumer graphics
hardware
This combination makes it uniquely suitable for a wide
range of applications, from next‐generation games to
DCC/CAD applications. Because it uses just a single sample
and requires no special processing steps, the technique
easily replaces existing shadow mapping shader code in an
application while producing much more compelling images.
The only required change is to replace the typical shadow
mapping pixel shader with a PCSS shader.

Step 3: Filtering. Now we perform a typical PCF step on the
shadow map using a kernel size proportional to the
penumbra estimate from Step 2.

4. Results
A relatively unoptimized version of the technique runs in
FX Composer at 21 fps on an NVIDIA GeForce Ultra at 640
x 480 with 64 samples used for the blocker search and for
the PCF step. This gives excellent results, particularly for
more realistic textured scenes, while maintaining a high
degree of interactivity. The number of samples can be
modified depending on the light size and desired quality.

5. References
HASENFRATZ, J., LAPIERRE, M., HOLZSCHUCH, N., AND SILLION, F. A
Survey of Real‐Time Soft Shadow Algorithms. Computer Graphics
Forum, Vol. 22, No. 4 (December 2003)

2. Previous Work

REEVES, W.T., SALESIN, D. H., AND COOK, R. I. Rendering Antialiased
Shadows with Depth Maps. In Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH 1987
Proceedings), pages 283‐291, July 1987.

The history of shadow generation in computer graphics is
vast and rich. A good survey of shadowing techniques can
be found in [Hasenfratz 2003]. While many attempts to

WILLIAMS, L. Casting Curved Shadows on Curved Surfaces. In
Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH 1978 Proceedings), pages 270‐274,
August 1978.

Percentage-Closer Soft Shadows
(Supplementary Material)
Randima Fernando
NVIDIA Corporation
Blocker Search Step
The following diagram illustrates the “blocker” and “receiver” terminology.

During the blocker search step, the PCSS algorithm searches a region of the shadow map (shown in red). During the search, it
averages depth values that are closer to the light than the receiving point. This average depth value is used in the subsequent
penumbra size estimation step.

Penumbra Size Estimation Step
The following diagram illustrates the geometry for estimating the penumbra size, assuming that the blocker, receiver, and
light source are parallel. This assumption works very well in practice and could be relaxed as an improvement.

Screenshots
A complex interaction between many objects (with a medium‐sized light source):

Same scene with a smaller light source:

Same scene with a larger light source:

