A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter
Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai

Figure 1: We render temporally coherent motion blur without any motion artifacts, even on animation sequences with complex
depth and motion relationships that are challenging for previous post-process techniques. All results are computed in about 3ms
at 1280 ⇥ 720 on a GeForce GTX480, and our filter integrates seamlessly with post-process anti-aliasing and depth of field.
Abstract
High-quality motion blur is an increasingly important and pervasive effect in interactive graphics that, even in the
context of offline rendering, is often approximated using a post process. Recent motion blur post-process filters
(e.g., [MHBO12,Sou13]) efficiently generate plausible results suitable for modern interactive rendering pipelines.
However, these approaches may produce distracting artifacts, for instance, when different motions overlap in depth
or when both large- and fine-scale features undergo motion. We address these artifacts with a more robust sampling
and filtering scheme that incurs only small additional runtime cost. We render plausible, temporally-coherent
motion blur on several complex animation sequences, all in just 3ms at a resolution 1280 ⇥ 720. Moreover, our
filter is designed to integrate seamlessly with post-process anti-aliasing and depth of field.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism—Color, shading, shadowing, and texture

1. Introduction
Motion blur is an essential effect in realistic image synthesis,
providing important motion cues and directing viewing attention, and is one of the few effects that distinguishes highquality film production renderings from interactive graphics.
We phenomenologically model the perceptual cues of motion blurred image sequences to approximate this effect with
high quality using a simple, high-performance post-process.
We are motivated by work in offline motion blur postprocessing [Coo86, ETH⇤ 09, LAC⇤ 11], where many of the
initial experiments applied reconstruction filters to stochastic sampling routines. Unfortunately, these approaches are
too heavyweight for modern game engines, however many
of their ideas remain useful. Conversely, adhoc approaches
(e.g., applying a Gaussian blur to moving objects) have existed in various forms for several years, however the question of how to approach motion blur post-processing using
a well-founded methodology has only recently gained attenNVIDIA Technical Report NVR-2013-003, November 26, 2013
c 2013 NVIDIA Corporation, Guertin, and Nowrouzezahrai. All rights reserved.

tion in the interactive rendering community. This methodology had first found use (and success) in post-process antialiasing [Lot09] and depth of field [Eng06] approaches.
We target temporally-coherent and plausible high-quality
motion blur that rivals super-sampled results, but on a
small performance budget and a simple implementation. As
such, we build upon recent post-process motion blur filters [MHBO12, Sou13] and address several of their limitations in order to produce high-performance, stable, featurepreserving and plausible motion blurred image sequences.
Contributions. Previous works rely on conservative assumptions about local velocity distributions at each pixel in
order to apply plausible, yet efficient, blurs. Unfortunately,
distracting artifacts arise when these assumptions are broken; this occurs when objects nearby in image-space move
with different velocities, which is unavoidable even in simple scenes, or when objects under (relative) motion have geometric features of different scales. We eliminate these ar-

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

tifacts and compute stable motion blur for both simple and
complex animation configurations. Our contributions are:
• an improved, variance-driven directional sampling
scheme that handles anisotropic velocity distributions,
• a sample-weighting scheme that preserves unblurred object details and captures fine- and large-scale blurring, and
• a more robust treatment of tile boundaries, and interaction
with post-process anti-aliasing and depth of field.
We operate on g-buffers, captured at a single time instance,
with standard rasterization. Our results are stable under animation, robustly handle complex motion scenarios, and all
in about 3ms per frame (Figure 1). Since ours is an image
post-process filter, it can readily be used in an art-driven context to generate non-physical and exaggerated motion blur
effects. We provide our full pseudocode in Appendix A.
2. Previous Work and Preliminairies
Given the extensive work on motion blur, we discuss recent
work most related to our approach and refer interested readers to a recent survey on the topic [NSG11].
Sampling Analysis and Reconstruction. Cook’s seminal
work on distribution effects [Coo86] was the first to apply different (image) filters to reduce artifacts in the context of stochastic ray-tracing and micropolygon rasterization. More recent approaches filter noise while retaining important visual details, operating in the multi-dimensional primal [HJW⇤ 08], wavelet [ODR09] or data-driven [SD12] domains. Egan et al. [ETH⇤ 09] specifically analyze the effects of sample placement and filtering, in the frequency
domain of object motion, and propose sheared reconstruction filters that operate on stochastically distributed spatiotemporal samples. Lehtinen et al. [LAC⇤ 11] use sparse samples in ray-space to reconstruct the anisotropy of the spatiotemporal light-field at a pixel and reconstruct a filtered pixel
value for distribution effects. These latter two techniques
aim to minimize integration error given fixed sampling budgets in stochastic rendering engines. We also reduce visible artifacts due to low-sampling rates, however we limit
ourselves to interactive graphics pipelines where distributed
temporal sampling is not an option and where compute budgets are on the order of milliseconds, not minutes.
Stochastic Rasterization. Recent work on extending triangle rasterization to support the temporal- and lensdomains [AMMH07], balances the advantages and disadvantages of GPU rasterization, stochastic ray-tracing,
and modern GPU micropolygon renderers [FLB⇤ 09]. Here,
camera-visibility and shading are evaluated at many samples in space-lens-time. Even with efficient implementations
on conventional GPU pipelines [MESL10], these approaches
remain too costly for modern interactive graphics applications. Still, Shirley et al. [SAC⇤ 11] discuss image-space filters for plausible motion blur given spatio-temporal output

from such stochastic multi-sample renderers. We are motivated by their phenomenological analysis of motion blur behaviour and extend their analysis to more robustly handle
complex motion scenarios (see Section 4).
Interactive Heuristics. Some approaches blur albedo textures prior to texture mapping (static) geometry [Lov05] or
extrude object geometry using shaders [TBI03], however
neither approach properly handles silhouette blurring, resulting in unrealistic motion blur. Max and Lerner [ML85], and
Pepper [Pep03], sort objects by depth, blur along their velocities, and compose the result in the final image, but this
strategy fails when a scene invalidates the painter’s visibility
assumption. Per-pixel variants of this approach can reduce
artifacts [Ros08,RMM10], especially when image velocities
are dilated prior to sampling [Sou11, KS11], however this
can corrupt background details and important motion features when multiple objects are present.
Motivated by recent tile-based, single blur velocity approaches [Len10, MHBO12, ZG12, Sou13] (see Section 3),
we also dilate velocities to reason about large-scale motion
behavior while sampling from the original velocity field to
reason about the spatially-varying blur we apply. However,
we additionally incorporate higher-order motion information
and feature-aware sample weighting to produce results that
are stable and robust to complex motion, effectively eliminating the artifacts present in the aforementioned “singlevelocity” approaches. Specifically, we robustly handle:
• interactions between many moving and static objects,
• complex temporally-varying depth relationships,
• correct blurring regardless of object size or tile-alignment,
• feature-preservation for static objects/backgrounds.

We build atop existing state-of-the-art tile-based plausible
motion blur approaches, detailed in Section 3, and present
our more robust multi-velocity extensions in Section 4.
3. Tile-Based Dominant Velocity Filtering Overview
We base our approach on recent single-velocity techniques [Len10, MHBO12, ZG12, Sou13] that combine phenomenological motion analysis and sampling-aware reconstruction filters. Figure 2 outlines the operation of these approaches: first, the image is split into square r ⇥ r tiles according to a maximum blur radius r in image-space, ensuring that each pixel can at most be influenced by its (1-ring)
neighboring tiles; secondly, a single dominant neighborhood
velocity direction is determined at each tile; finally, the color
at the pixel is combined with weighted color samples along
the dominant blur direction.
We review some notable details of this approach below:
• a tile’s dominant velocity vmax (Figure 2b; green) is computed in two steps: maximum per-pixel velocities are retained per-tile (Figure 2a,b; green, blue), and a 1-ring
maximum of the per-tile maxima yields vmax ,

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

Pixel Velocities

Max Tile
Velocities

Single Velocity
Sampling

Figure 2: Motion blur with “single-velocity” techniques.
• pixels are sampled exclusively along vmax , yielding high
cache coherence but ignoring complex motions, and
• each sample’s weight is computed using a depth-aware
metric that only considers the magnitude of velocities at
the source and sample points.
The "‘TileMax"’ pass can be computed in two passes, one
per image dimension, to greatly improve performance at the
cost of a slight increase in memory usage. Samples are jittered to reduce (but not eliminate; see Section 4.5) banding,
and samples are weighted (Figure 2c) to reproduce the following phenomenological motion effects:

Single Direction

Ours

Figure 3: Top: an animation with complex depth and motion relationships. The camera is moving upwards and the
car is doing a sharp turn while moving up. Bottom: singlevelocity approaches (left) cannot handle these cases, resulting in distracting artifacts both inside and between tiles; our
filter (right) generates the correct plausible blur and is temporally stable (see video).

1. a distant pixel/object blurring over the shading pixel,
2. transparency at the shading pixel from its motion, and
3. the proper depth-aware combination of effects 1 and 2.

both an incorrect blur inside a tile and blur mismatches between tiles (see Figures 3 and 6). This can occur, for example, with rotating objects (see Figure 7), objects with features smaller than a tile (see Figure 11), or when the view
and motion directions are (nearly) parallel (see Figure 6).

These techniques generate plausible motion blur with a
simple, high-performance post-process and have thus already been adopted in production game engines; however,
the single dominant velocity assumption, coupled with the
sample weighting scheme, results in noticeable visual artifacts that limit their ability to properly handle: overlapping
objects that move in different directions, tile boundaries, and
thin objects (see Figures 3, 6, 7, 11, 12 and 15).

Specifically, by exploiting this assumption to reduce the
sampling domain to 1D, single-velocity approaches weight
samples along vmax according only to the magnitudes of
their velocities, and not the directions. This can result in
overblurred shading when samples (that lie along the dominant direction) should otherwise not contribute to the pixel
but are still factored into the sum, especially if they are moving quickly (i.e., have large velocity magnitudes).

We identify, explain, and evaluate new solutions for these
limitations. We follow the well-founded phenomenological
methodology established by single-velocity approaches and
other prior work [Len10, SAC⇤ 11, MHBO12, ZG12, Sou13],
and our technique maintains high cache coherence and parallelizable divergence-free computation for an equally simple
and high-performance implementation.

To reduce these artifacts we sample along a second, carefully chosen direction. Moreover, we split samples between
these two directions according to the variance in the neighborhood’s velocities, while also weighting samples using a
locally-adaptive metric based on the deviation of sample velocities from the blur direction. This scheme better resolves
complex motion details and still retains cache coherence by
sampling along (fixed) 1D domains. Section 5 details our algorithm and we provide pseudocode in Appendix A.

4. Stable and Robust Feature-Aware Motion Blur
We motivate our improvements by presenting artifacts in
existing (single-velocity) approaches. We demonstrate clear
improvements in visual quality with negligible additional
cost. Furthermore, our supplemental video illustrates the stability of our solution under animation and on scenes with
complex geometry, depth, velocity and texture.
4.1. Several Influential Motion Vectors.
The dominant velocity assumption breaks down when a tile
contains pixels with many different velocities, resulting in

Local Velocity Sampling. If a pixel’s velocity differs significantly from the dominant direction, then it should also be
considered during sampling. As such, we sample along both
the pixel’s velocity and the dominant velocity directions.
This immediately improves the blur for scenes with complex pixel- and neighborhood-velocity relationships (e.g.,
Figure 3), however at the cost of increased noise since we are
effectively halving the sampling rate in each 1D sub-domain.
If the pixel’s velocity is negligible, this scheme effectively
“wastes” all the integration samples placed on the second direction. In these cases, we replace the pixel’s velocity with

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

the velocity perpendicular to the dominant direction, sampling along this new vector for half of the total samples and
in the dominant direction for the other half. This helps in scenarios where the dominant velocity entirely masks smaller
velocities with different directions, in the neighborhood, and
the perpendicular direction serves as a "best-guess" to maximize the probability of sampling along an otherwise ignored
important direction. Of course, if no such important (albeit
secondary) direction exists, then we are left with a similar
situation where samples placed along this perpendicular direction are “wasted”.
We ultimately combine the ideas of pixel (v(p)) and
perpendicular-dominant (vmax (t)) velocities at the shading
pixel p’s tile t: we place a number (discussed below) of samples along the center direction that interpolates between v(p)
and v?
max (t) as the pixel’s velocity diminishes past a minimum user threshold g (see Figure 4),
⇣
⌘
vc (p) = lerp v(p), v?
0.5)/g . (1)
max (t), (kv(p)k
Sampling along both vmax (t)
and vc (p) ensures that each
sample contributes usefully to
the final blur, better capturing
complex motion effects. This
approach remains robust when
the pixel’s velocity is low (or
zero, for static objects; see Figures 3 and 6).

diThe number of samples Figure 4: Sampling ?
rections
v
max (green), vmax
we place along vc , and their
weights (both along vc and (yellow) and v(p) (blue).
vmax ), plays an important role in the behavior and quality of
the motion blur. We address the problems of assigning samples to each direction, and weighting them, separately. We
first discuss the distribution of samples over these two directions, and only later discuss a more accurate scheme for
weighting their individual contributions. Our final sampling
scheme is robust to complex scenes and stable under animation.
Tile Variance for Sample Assignment. We first address the segmentation and assignment of samples to
vc and vmax . In cases where the dominant velocity assumption holds, we should sample exclusively from vmax ,
as the standard single-velocity
approaches [Len10, MHBO12,
ZG12, Sou13] do; however, it is
rare that this assumption holds
completely and we would like
to find the ideal assignment of
samples to the two directions in
order to simultaneously capture
more complex motions while
reducing noise. This amounts Figure 5: Variance
(green) for tiles neighboring the pixel p (red).

to minimizing the number of
“wasted” samples. To do so, we
propose a simple variance estimation metric.
At each tile, we first compute the angular variation between a tile’s and its neighbor’s maximum velocities as
⇥
⇤
u(t) = 1 |N1 | Â abs [vmax (t)] · abs vmax (t) , (2)
t2N

where N is the (1-ring) neighborhood tile set around (and
including) t. The variance 0  u  1 is larger when neighboring tile velocities differ from vmax (t), and smaller when
they do not. As such, we can use u(t) to determine the number of samples assigned to vc and vmax with: u⇥N assigned
to vc and (1 u)⇥N assigned to vmax (Figure 5).
This metric works well in practice, significantly reducing
distracting visual artifacts near complex motion while gracefully reverting to distributing fewer samples along vc when
the motion is simple; however, we require an extra (reducedresolution) render pass (and texture) to compute (and store)
u, which is less than ideal for pipeline integration (albeit
with negligible performance impact). We observe in practice that, while the variance-based sample assignment does
improve the quality of the result, conservatively splitting our
samples evenly between vc and vmax (i.e., N/2 samples for
each) generates roughly equal quality results (see Figure 6).
We note, however, that the weighting of each sample plays
a sizeable role in both the quality of the final result and the
ability to properly and consistently reconstruct complex motion blurs. We detail our new weighting scheme and contrast
it to the scheme used in prior single-velocity approaches.

Single Direction

Variance

Velocity Direction

Figure 6: The lion in Sponza moving directly towards the
viewer. Bottom: single-velocity results (left), our variancebased sample distribution (middle) conservative sample distribution (right) both with vmax and vc direction sampling.

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

edges; we (additionally) multiply the weight for this term
by the maximum of the two dot products above; here, the
maximum is a conservative estimate that errs on the side
of slightly oversmoothing any such edges.
These simple changes (see pseudocode in Appendix A) significantly improve quality within and between tiles, particularly when many motion directions are present (Figure 6).
4.2. Tile Boundary Discontinuities.

Single Direction

Ours Without/With Blending

Figure 7: Tile edge artifacts. Bottom: single-velocity blurring (left) results in disturbing tile-edge artifacts that are
reduced, in part, using multi-direction sampling (right; bottom) and, in full, with stochastic vmax blending (right; top).
Feature-Aware Sample Weights. Single-velocity
proaches compute weights by combining two metrics:

ap-

• depth difference between the sampled position and p, and
• the magnitude of the velocity at the sample point and at p.

This does not consider that samples can still fall on objects
that move in directions different than vmax (and even vc ). We
instead additionally consider the velocity direction at samples when computing their weights. This yields a scheme
that more appropriately adapts to fine-scale motions, without
complicating the original scheme. Specifically, we will consider the dot product between blurring directions and sampled velocity directions. Recalling the three phenomenological motion blur effects in Section 3, we modify the weights
corresponding to each component as follows:
1. the contribution of distant objects blurring onto p, along
the sampling direction, are (additionally) weighted by the
dot product between the sample’s velocity direction and
the sampling direction (either vmax or vc , as discussed earlier); here, the total weight models the amount of color
that blurs from the distant sample onto p and, as such, can
be modulated as the velocity at the sample vs differs from
the blurring/sampling direction,
2. the transparency caused by p’s blur onto its surrounding is
(additionally) weighted by the dot product of its velocity
(actually, vc ) and the dominant blur direction vmax ; here,
the total weight models the visibility of the background
behind the pixel/object at p and, as such, if vc differs from
vmax , the contribution should reduce appropriately, and
3. the single-velocity approaches include a correction term
to both model the combination of the two blurring effects
above and also account for discontinuities along object

The tile-based nature of singlevelocity approaches, combined
with their exclusive dependence
on the dominant velocity, can
easily lead to distracting tileboundary discontinuities when
blur directions vary significantly
between tiles (see Figure 7). This
occurs when vmax differs sigFigure 8: Adapting pernificantly between adjacent tiles
sample weights accordand, since the original approach
ing to the fine-scale vesamples exclusively along vmax ,
locity information.
neighboring tiles can end up being blurred in completely different directions. Our sampling
and weighting approaches (Section 4.1) already help to reduce this artifact, but we continue to sample from vmax (albeit
not exclusively, and with a different weighing scheme), and
so we remain sensitive (to a lesser extent) to quick changes
in vmax (see Figures 9 and 7).
To further reduce this
artifact, we stochastically
offset our lookup into the
NeighborMax maximum
neighborhood
velocity
texture for pixels near a
tile edge. This effectively
trades banding for noise
in the image, around tile
boundaries, along edges
in the vmax buffer. Thus,
Figure 9: We jitter the vmax (t)
the probability of sampling
sample with higher probabilalong the vmax of a neighity closer to tile borders.
boring tile falls off as a
pixel’s distance to a tile border increases (Figure 9); we use
a simple linear fall-off with a controllable (but fixed; see
Section 5) slope t.
It is important to note that, while intuitively logical, linearly interpolating between neighborhood velocities along
tile edges produces incorrect results. Indeed, not only is the
interpolation itself not well-defined (for instance, interpolating two antiparallel velocities requires special care), but even
more importantly, two objects blurring on one another with
different motion directions is not equivalent to blurring along
the average of their directions. Doing so causes distracting

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

artifacts where the blur seems to wave and often highlights,
as opposed to mask, tile boundaries.
4.3. Preserving Thin Features.
Single-velocity filtering ignores the (jittered) mid-point sample closest to the pixel and instead explicitly weighs the color
at p by the magnitude of the p’s velocity, without considering relative depth or velocity information (as with the remaining samples). This was designed to retain some of a
pixel’s original color regardless of the final blur, but it is not
robust to scenes with thin features or large local depth/velocity variation. Underestimating this center weight causes thin
objects to disappear or “ghost” (see Figure 11). Furthermore,
the weight is not normalized and so its effect reduces as N
increases. These artifacts are distracting and unrealistic, and
the weight’s dependence on N makes it difficult to control.
We instead set this center weight as w p = kvk 1 ⇥ N/k,
where k is a user-parameter to bias its importance. We use
k = 40 in all of our results (see Section 5 for all parameter settings). The second term in w p serves as a pseudoenergy conservation normalization, making w p robust to
varying sampling rates N (unlike previous single-velocity approaches). Lastly, we do not omit the mid-point sample closest to p, treating it just as any other sample and applying our
modified feature-aware sampling scheme (Section 4.1). As
such, we also account for relative velocity variations at the
midpoint, resulting in plausible motion blur robust to thin
features and to different sampling rates (see Figure 11).
4.4. Neighbor Blurring.
Both our approach and previous single-velocity approaches
rely on an efficient approximation of the dominant neighborhood velocity vmax . We present a modification to
McGuire et al.’s [MHBO12] scheme that increases robustness by reducing superfluous blur artifacts present
when the vmax estimate deviates from its true value.
Specifically, the NeighborMax pass in [MHBO12] conservatively computes the maximum velocity using the
eight neighboring tiles (see Section 3 and Figure 2b),
which can potentially result in an overestimation of
the actual maximum velocity affecting the central tile.
We instead only consider a diagonal tile in the vmax computation if its maximum blur direction would in fact affect the current tile. For instance, if the tile to
the top-left of the central tile has
a maximum velocity that does not
point towards the middle, it is
not considered in the vmax comFigure 10: Off-axis
putation (Figure 10). The reasonneighbors are only used
ing is that slight velocity deviafor vmax computation if
tions at on-axis tiles can result in
they will blur over the
central tile.

Single

Ours

N = 17

Single

Ours

N = 25

Single

Ours

N = 45

Figure 11: Thin objects like the flagpole in Sponza ghost,
to varying degrees depending on the sampling rate, with the
single-velocity approach. Our approach resolves these details and is robust to changes in the sampling rate.
blurs that overlap the middle tile,
however larger deviations are required at the corner (off-axis) tiles.
4.5. Stochastic Noise and Post-Process Anti-Aliasing
We have discussed how to choose the direction along which
to place each sample (either vmax or vc ) as well as how to
weight them (Section 4.1), however we have not discussed
where to place samples along the 1D domain. Numerical
integration approaches are sensitive to sample distribution
and, in the case of uniform samples distributed over our
1D domain, the quality of both ours and the single-velocity
techniques can be significantly influenced by this choice.
McGuire et al. [MHBO12] use equally-spaced uniform samples and jitter the pattern at each pixel using a hashed noise
texture. This jittered uniform distribution has been recently
analyzed in the context of 1D shadowing problems with linear lights [RAMN12] where it was proven to reduce variance
better than low-discrepancy and stratified sampling.
We modify this strategy for motion blur integration and
use a deterministic Halton sequence [WLH97] to jitter the
per-pixel sample sets with a larger maximum jitter value h
(in pixel units), which improves the quality of the results;
furthermore, as discussed earlier, we do not ignore the central sample closest to p and, as such, properly take its relative
depth and local-velocity into account during weighting.
Noise Patterns and Post-Process Anti-Aliasing. The noise
patterns produced by our stochastic integration are wellsuited as input to post-processed screen-space anti-aliasing
methods, such as FXAA. Specifically, per-pixel jitter ensures
that wherever there is residual noise, it appears as a highfrequency pattern that triggers the antialiasing luminance
edge detector (Figure 13, top right). The post-process antialiasing then blurs each of these pixels (Figure 13, bottom
left), yielding a result with quality comparable to roughly
double the sampling rate (without FXAA; Figure 13, top
left). Stochastic vmax blending (Section 4.2) is compatible
with this effect.
Furthermore, it is possible to maximize the noise smoothing properties of post-processed antialiasing by feeding a

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

Figure 12: Our motion blur results are temporally coherent and stable even in scenes with turbulent geometric deformation.
maximum-intensity, pixel-sized checkerboard to the edge
detector’s luminance input. This causes the antialiasing filter
to detect edges on all motion blurred pixels, thus suppressing residual motion blur sampling noise (Figure 13, bottom
right).

V[x,y] =

5. Implementation and Results
All our results are captured live at 1280 ⇥ 720 on an Intel Core i5 at 3.3GHz with 16GB RAM and an NVIDIA
GTX480 with 1.5GB vRAM. We recommend that readers digitally zoom-in on our (high-resolution) results to
note fine-scale details. Since our filter implementation
does not have any divergent code paths our performance, at this resolution, was consistently 3.2ms ± 5%.
We use the same parameter settings for all our scenes:
{N, r, t, k, h, g} = {25, 40, 1, 40, 0.95, 1.5}. All intermediate textures, TileMax, NeighborMax [MHBO12] and
TileVariance (Section 4.1), are stored in UINT8 format
and sampled using nearest neighbor interpolation, except
for TileVariance that required a bilinear interpolant to
eliminate residual tile boundary artifacts.
We note the importance of properly quantizing and encoding the per-pixel velocity when using integer buffers for
storage (as is typically done in e.g. game engines). Specifically, a limitation in the encoding used in McGuire et al.’s
implementation, V[x,y]= v(px,y )/2r + 0.5, is that the x and y

No AA

FXAA

velocity components are clamped separately to ±r, causing
large velocities to only take on one of four possible values:
(±r, ±r). Instead, we propose a clamping scheme that makes
optimal use of an integer buffer’s precision, normalizing according to the range [ r, r] as

FXAA edges

FXAA with checkerboard

Figure 13: Our noise is well-suited for standard postprocess FXAA edge-detection, and we can further “hint”
FXAA using a pixel-frequency luminance checkerboard.

v(px,y )
max(min(|v(px,y )|⇥E,r),0.5)
+ 0.5 ,
2r ⇥
|v(px,y )|+e

where e = 10 5 and the exposure time E is in seconds.
We modify the continuous depth comparison function
(zCompare) used by McGuire et al. to better support depthaware fore- and background blurring as follows: instead of
using a hard-coded, scene-dependent depth-transition interval, we use the relative depth interval
⇣
⇣
⌘ ⌘
(za zb )
zCompare[za , zb ] = min max 0, 1 min(z
,1 ,
,z )
a

b

where za and zb are both depth values. This relative test
has important advantages: it works on values in a sceneindependent manner, e.g. comparing objects at 10 and 20
z-units will give similar results to objects at 1000 and 2000 zunits. This allows smooth blending between distant objects,
compensating for their reduced on-screen velocity coverage,
all while remaining robust to arbitrary scene scaling.
Motivated by Sousa’s [Sou13] endorsement of McGuire
et al.’s single-velocity implementation, which has already
been used in several game engines, all our comparisons were
conducted against an optimized version of the open source
implementation provided by McGuire et al., with both our
Halton jittering scheme and our velocity encoding. While
the variance-based u metric for distributing samples between
vmax and vc yields slightly improved results over e.g. a 50/50
sample distribution, we observe no perceptual benefit in using u during interactive animation; as such, we disabled this
feature in all our results (except Figure 6, middle zoom-in).
Post-Process Depth of Field. Earlier, we discussed our approach’s integration with FXAA, a commonly used postprocess in modern game engines. Another commonly used
post-process effect is depth of field (DoF); however, the
combination of DoF and motion blur post-processes is a subject of little investigation. We implemented the post-process
DoF approach of Gilham in ShaderX5 [Eng06] and briefly
discuss its interaction with our motion blur filter. Specifically, the correct order in which to apply the two filters is not

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

immediately apparent. We experimented with both options
and illustrate our results in an especially difficult scene, as
far as motion and DoF complexity are concerned: three distinctly colored wheels, each undergoing different rotational
motion, at three different depths, and with the focus on the
green middle wheel (see Figure 14).
The differences are subtle and our experiments far
from comprehensive, however we note (somewhat counterintuitively) that applying DoF after motion blur yields fewer
visible edges in blurred regions and sharper features on infocus regions. Applying DoF after motion blur has the added
benefit of further blurring our noise artifacts.

6. Conclusions and Future Work
We presented a high-performance post-process motion blur
filter that is robust to scenes with complex inter-object motions and fine-scale details. We demonstrated our approach
on several such scenes with clear quality benefits, both in
images and in animation (see the supplemental video), and
at a negligible cost compared to the state-of-the-art. Our approach is temporally coherent, easy to integrate, and readily
compatible with other commonly used post-process effects.
Some interesting avenues of future work include a more indepth analysis of the interaction and combination of DoF and
motion blur post-processes, as well as extending our ideas to
more flexible rendering architectures, such as stochastic rasterization or micropolygon renderers.

References
[AMMH07] A KENINE -M ÖLLER T., M UNKBERG J., H ASSEL GREN J.: Stochastic rasterization using time-continuous triangles. In Graphics Hardware (2007), Eurographics, pp. 7–16. 2
[Coo86] C OOK R. L.: Stochastic sampling in computer graphics.
ACM Trans. Graph. 5, 1 (1986), 51–72. 1, 2
[Eng06] E NGEL W.: Shader X5: Advanced Rendering Techniques. Charles River Media, MA, USA, 2006. 1, 7
[ETH⇤ 09] E GAN K., T SENG Y.-T., H OLZSCHUCH N., D URAND
F., R AMAMOORTHI R.: Frequency analysis and sheared reconstruction for rendering motion blur. ACM Trans. Graph. 28, 3
(2009). 1, 2
[FLB⇤ 09] FATAHALIAN K., L UONG E., B OULOS S., A KELEY
K., M ARK W. R., H ANRAHAN P.: Data-parallel rasterization
of micropolygons with defocus and motion blur. In High Performance Graphics (2009), ACM, pp. 59–68. 2
[HJW⇤ 08] H ACHISUKA T., JAROSZ W., W EISTROFFER R. P.,
DALE K., H UMPHREYS G., Z WICKER M., J ENSEN H. W.:
Multidimensional adaptive sampling and reconstruction for ray
tracing. ACM Trans. Graph. 27, 3 (2008). 2
[KS11] K ASYAN N., S CHULZ N.: Secrets of cryengine 3 graphics technology. In SIGGRAPH Talks. ACM, 2011. 2
[LAC⇤ 11] L EHTINEN J., A ILA T., C HEN J., L AINE S., D U RAND F.: Temporal light field reconstruction for rendering distribution effects. ACM Trans. Graph. 30, 4 (2011), 55. 1, 2
[Len10] L ENGYEL E.: Motion blur and the velocity-depthgradient buffer. In Game Engine Gems, Lengyel E., (Ed.). Jones
& Bartlett Publishers, March 2010. 2, 3, 4
[Lot09] L OTTES T.:
Fast approximate anti-aliasing (fxaa).
2009. URL: http://developer.download.nvidia.
com/assets/gamedev/files/sdk/11/FXAA_
WhitePaper.pdf. 1
[Lov05] L OVISCACH J.: Motion blur for textures by means of
anisotropic filtering. EGSR, pp. 105–110. 2
[MESL10] M C G UIRE M., E NDERTON E., S HIRLEY P., L UEBKE
D. P.: Real-time stochastic rasterization on conventional GPU
architectures. In High Performance Graphics (2010). 2
[MHBO12] M C G UIRE M., H ENNESSY P., B UKOWSKI M., O S MAN B.: A reconstruction filter for plausible motion blur. In I3D
(2012), pp. 135–142. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10
[ML85] M AX N. L., L ERNER D. M.: A two-and-a-half-d
motion-blur algorithm. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (New
York, USA, 1985), SIGGRAPH ’85, ACM, pp. 85–93. 2
[NSG11] NAVARRO F., S ERÓN F. J., G UTIERREZ D.: Motion
blur rendering: State of the art. Computer Graphics Forum 30, 1
(2011), 3–26. 2
[ODR09] OVERBECK R. S., D ONNER C., R AMAMOORTHI R.:
Adaptive wavelet rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 28, 5 (2009). 2
[Pep03] P EPPER D.: Per-pixel motion blur for wheels.
ShaderX6, Engel W., (Ed.). Charles River Media, 2003. 2

DoF!MB

MB!DoF

DoF!MB

MB!DoF

Figure 14: DoF and motion blur stress test. Top: Motion
blur alone. Bottom: Comparison of motion blur and depth
of field ordering. We note slightly better results when DoF is
applied after motion blur.

In

[RAMN12] R AMAMOORTHI R., A NDERSON J., M EYER M.,
N OWROUZEZAHRAI D.: A theory of monte carlo visibility sampling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (2012). 6
[RMM10] R ITCHIE M., M ODERN G., M ITCHELL K.: Split second motion blur. In SIGGRAPH 2010 Talks (NY, USA, 2010),
ACM. 2
[Ros08] ROSADO G.: Motion blur as a post-processing effect. In
GPU Gems 3. Addison-Wesley, 2008, pp. 575–581. 2

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

Single Direction

Ours

Single Direction

Ours

Single Direction

Ours

Single Direction

Ours

Single Direction

Ours

Single Direction

Ours

Figure 15: Our results are temporally stable on complex scenes where previous approaches suffer from distracting artifacts.
[SAC⇤ 11] S HIRLEY P., A ILA T., C OHEN J. D., E NDERTON E.,
L AINE S., L UEBKE D. P., M C G UIRE M.: A local image reconstruction algorithm for stochastic rendering. In I3D (2011),
pp. 9–14. 2, 3
[SD12] S EN P., DARABI S.: On filtering the noise from the random parameters in monte carlo rendering. ACM Trans. Graph.
31, 3 (2012), 18. 2
[Sou11] S OUSA T.: Cryengine 3 rendering techniques. In Microsoft Game Technology Conference. August 2011. 2
[Sou13] S OUSA T.: Graphics gems from cryengine 3. In ACM
SIGGRAPH Course Notes (2013). 1, 2, 3, 4, 7
[TBI03] TATARCHUK N., B RENNAN C., I SIDORO J. R.: Motion
blur using geometry and shading distortion. In ShaderX2: Shader
Programming Tips and Tricks with DirectX 9.0, Engel W., (Ed.).
2003. 2
[WLH97] W ONG T.-T., L UK W.-S., H ENG P.-A.: Sampling
with hammersley and halton points. J. Graph. Tools 2, 2 (1997),
9–24. 6
[ZG12] Z IOMA R., G REEN S.:
Mastering DirectX 11
with Unity, March 2012.
Presentation at GDC 2012
https://developer.nvidia.com/sites/default/
files/akamai/gamedev/files/gdc12/GDC2012_
Mastering_DirectX11_with_Unity.pdf. 2, 3, 4

Jean-Philippe Guertin, Morgan McGuire, and Derek Nowrouzezahrai / A Fast and Stable Feature-Aware Motion Blur Filter

Acknowledgements
The NeighborMax tile culling algorithm was contributed by
Dan Evangelakos at Williams College. Observations about
FXAA, the use of the luminance checkerboard, and considering the central velocity in the gather kernel are from
our colleagues at Vicarious Visions: Padraic Hennessy, Brian
Osman, Michael Bukowski.
Appendix A: Pseudocode
We include pseudocode that depends on the following helper
functions and shorthand operators: sOffset jitters a tile
lookup (but never into a diagonal tile), rnmix is a vector linear interpolation followed by normalization, norm returns a
normalized vector, b·c returns the whole component, and &
denotes bitwise and. Unless otherwise specified, we use the
notation/functions of McGuire et al. [MHBO12]. Our function returns four values: the filtered color and luminance
value to pass to an optional FXAA post-process.
function filter(p):
let j = halton( 1, 1)
let vmax = NeighborMax[p/r + sOffset(p, j)]
if (kvmaxk  0.5)
return (color[X], luma(color[X]))
let wn = norm(vmax), vc = V[p],
,! w p = ( wn y , wn x )
if (w p · vc < 0) w p = w p
let wc = rnmix(w p , norm(vc ), (kvc k 0.5)/g)
// Begin integration with the current point
// (center weight) p
let totalWeight = N/(k⇥kvc k)
let result = color[p] ⇥ totalWeight

for i 2 [0, N)
let t = mix( 1, 1, (i + j ⇥ h + 1)/(N + 1)) // jitter
our sample
// Compute the sample point S; split samples
between {vmax , vc }
let d = vc if i odd or vmax if i even
let T = t ⇥ kvmaxk
let S = bt ⇥ dc + p
// Compute S’s velocity and color
let vs = V[S], colorSample = color[S]
// Fore- vs. background classification of Y
// relative to p
let f = zCompare(Z[p], Z[S])
let b = zCompare(Z[S], Z[p])
// This sample’s weight and velocity-aware factors
// (Section 4.1)
let weight = 0, wA = wc · d, wB = norm(vs ) · d
// The three phenomenological cases
// (Sections 3 and 4.1):
// Objects moving over p, blur from p’s motion,
// and their blending
weight += f · cone(T, 1/kvs k) ⇥ wB
weight += b · cone(T, 1/kvc k) ⇥ wA
weight += cylinder(T, min(kvs k, kvc k))
,! ⇥ max(wA, wB) ⇥ 2
totalWeight += weight // For normalization
result += colorSample ⇥ weight
return (result/totalWeight, (px + py )&1)

